Copyright notice:

This is version 1.39 of PARI, (c) 1989-1993 by
C. Batut, D. Bernardi, H. Cohen and M. Olivier.

This software is intended as a service to the scientific community,
but the authors cannot be held responsible for any consequences,
either direct or indirect, which the use of this package may have. 
It can be freely copied and spread, as long as no files are modified, and
that the whole package (source and manual), including this README file
is included.

To compile the users manual, type "make" in the "doc" directory.

For those already familiar with version 1.35 of Pari, read the text file
Newin1.37 to see what has changed between 1.35 and 1.37, Newin1.38 to
see what has changed since version 1.37, and Newin1.39 to see what has
changed since version 1.38.

Some on-line help can be obtained in GP (? for a list of sections, ?n for 
functions in section number n, ?command for a one line description of the 
command, ?\ for description of all the metacommands, ?* for all functions).
Some commands are not documented at all in this on-line help e.g. % to get
modulo, [,,,] to get vectors, [,,,;,,,;,,,;,,,] to get matrices, Ctrl-C to 
abort a command but stay in GP, etc...).

Complete on-line help can be obtained by using GP in a GNUemacs
buffer (see section 3.11 of the manual).

  The output routines by default print in "prettymatrix" format. Type \p
twice if you want to be in "raw" format. The "prettyprint" format
(type \p only once) is not very nice and needs to be improved.

  Many bugs remain, known and unknown. Among the most notable known
one is the bad treatment of power series in more than one variable.
This may be corrected some time in the future. 

  Evidently you will find bugs in PARI, some subtle, some not, and
you may also consider it indispensable to have some extra tools
available. We are constantly expanding the PARI library,
but it takes time and work.
  In any case, we would appreciate correspondence; please be 
tolerant. We know many of the defects in PARI, so don't flame us.
After all, you don't have to use it. On the other hand, we will
enormously appreciate constructive criticisms, or even programs for
those who want to delve in the innards of PARI without the technical
reference manual, which remains to be written (a start is Chapter 5
of the users manual).

  Again, we repeat that you must feel free to spread PARI if you think
it useful, with this README file included. However do NOT spread modified 
versions without getting permission from us.

The two modes in which you can use PARI are:
-- The library mode 
-- The programmable calculator mode, called GP.
In addition, GP can be used in a special GNUemacs buffer, and
this provides additional capabilities (thanks mainly to David Carlisle).


Our address is:
	Prof. Henri COHEN  (re: PARI)
	UFR de Mathematiques et Informatique
	Universite Bordeaux I
	351 Cours de la Liberation
	33405 TALENCE CEDEX
		FRANCE

e-mail: pari@math.u-bordeaux.fr
anonymous ftp from: megrez.math.u-bordeaux.fr (147.210.16.17) or 
                    math.ucla.edu.


